Restarting your computer is a great example of an operating system function. Often times if your device is having a strong lag from too many applications being opened or maybe you've just updated some software, pushing the button (or however you restart your device) is a great way to start fresh. Most devices react in the same way, the power button sends an electrical current internally to circuits within your device, the pulse of electricity then makes the processor chip reset itself. Once blank, it automatically finds fireware for instructions on how to start up again which initiates some tests within the device. If the tests come back clear of any errors, then the operating system gives the computer instructions to reload the ram specific to the user as well as other memory like the clock or assigning resources. The operating system then loads other system configuartions before running and displaying applications.
Monitoring performance is a function of operating systems. If for example you are trying to find out what is causing your device to slow down, you can look at the performance monitor to see if an application is using a lot of memory RAM on one particular app. Which means you might only be able to have that one app open and not anything else to increase speed and efficiency or maybe you're running out of memory and need to uninstall some applications. Either way, the performance monitor would help pin point as a user exactly which things you need to focus on.   
File, disk, and system management tools is another effective system function with many tools. An operating system often times has tools that a user can use to manage the device better. For example, the search function- which allows you to look for a specific document based on the criteria you input. Disk cleanup, which essentially is to do just that, look for and remove any unwanted files or duplicates sometimes. File compression, zip folders which is the aftermath of a shrunken file, what we use often in this case. As well as many other helpful tasks.
